We can stipulate that it was a different time. There were different ideas. We can grant that people are products of their environment. We can grant that people are complicated and can still be good, even if they have some abhorrent beliefs.

But still, the contrast is too stark not to point out. In the 19th century, the two great translators of the Stoics were in America. George Long, was a British classicist who did a stint at the University of Virginia, and later put out an incredible edition of Marcus Aurelius. Thomas Wentworth Higginson was a New Englander who would translate Epictetus. These two men both loved the ancient insights and ideas of the Stoics which were formed around the virtues of courage and discipline and justice and wisdom.

Yet when it came to the most divisive issue of the day, they took very different paths. While he was in Virginia, George Long married into a slave-owning, Southern family. In fact, when he and his wife returned to England, they took one of her slaves with them as a servant (where the man later died of cholera). Higginson, on the other hand, left Harvard in 1845, to dedicate himself to the cause of abolition. He protested the Mexican-American War, rightly seeing it as a cause trumped up by slave owners to expand the institution into new territories. When the Civil War broke out, he enlisted for the Union, where he served as Captain until he was wounded in battle. Then he led First South Carolina Volunteers, the first regiment of Black freedmen in the war.

One philosophy. Two men. Two paths. It’s a schism that goes back to the ancients themselves. Some of the Stoics were opposed to slavery in the ancient world. Others accepted the practice, benefited from it. Epictetus was a victim of this system, cruelly tortured and exploited by a man who worked for Nero, while Seneca—Nero’s right hand man—took the institution as a fact of life.

It’s delusional to think that there aren’t issues like this in front of us today. It’s imperative that each of us try to face that, try to ask what this philosophy demands of us—particularly the virtue of Justice. George Long failed that test (he would later dedicate a later an edition of Meditations to Robert E. Lee). Thomas Wentworth Higginson measured up to it, passed it with flying colors.

What about you? Which tradition will you follow? What path will you take?

Whether we want to admit it or not, we face these questions in big and small ways every day. That’s why the Stoics urge us to develop our own character, our own moral compass. So that even if we’re tired, overwhelmed, or frustrated, we can make a decision in the moment that years later we’re proud of, that doesn’t fill us with regret.

Because we already made the decision. We made it when we decided that this is the kind of person we’re going to be, this is what we stand for, this is what we fight for.

Which is exactly why Ryan Holiday wrote his latest book Right Thing, Right Now: Good Values. Good Character. Good Deeds…